<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Cấu trúc và ý nghĩa của chương trình máy tính, 2e: 1.3.2</title>

<meta name="description" content="Cấu trúc và ý nghĩa của chương trình máy tính, 2e: 1.3.2"/>
<meta name="keywords" content="Cấu trúc và ý nghĩa của chương trình máy tính, 2e: 1.3.2"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0"/>
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any"/>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top"/>
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents"/>
<link href="1_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3" rel="prev" title="1.3"/>
<link href="1_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e3" rel="next" title="1.3.3"/>
<link href="1_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e1" rel="prev" title="1.3.1"/>

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/prettify.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/lang-lisp.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t1_002e3_002e2"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e3" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.3.3</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e1" accesskey="p" rel="prev">1.3.1</a>, Up: <a href="1_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3" accesskey="u" rel="prev">1.3</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr/>

<a id="Constructing-Procedures-Using-Lambda"></a>
<h4 class="subsection"><span class="secnum">1.3.2</span><span class="sectitle">Constructing Procedures Using <code>Lambda</code></span></h4>

<p>In using <code>sum</code> as in <a href="1_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e1">1.3.1</a>, it seems terribly awkward to
have to define trivial procedures such as <code>pi-term</code> and <code>pi-next</code>
just so we can use them as arguments to our higher-order procedure.  Rather
than define <code>pi-next</code> and <code>pi-term</code>, it would be more convenient to
have a way to directly specify “the procedure that returns its input
incremented by 4” and “the procedure that returns the reciprocal of its input
times its input plus 2.”  We can do this by introducing the special form
<code>lambda</code>, which creates procedures.  Using <code>lambda</code> we can describe
what we want as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(lambda (x) (+ x 4))
</pre></div>

<p>and
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(lambda (x) (/ 1.0 (* x (+ x 2))))
</pre></div>

<p>Then our <code>pi-sum</code> procedure can be expressed without defining any
auxiliary procedures as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (pi-sum a b)
  (sum (lambda (x) (/ 1.0 (* x (+ x 2))))
       a
       (lambda (x) (+ x 4))
       b))
</pre></div>

<p>Again using <code>lambda</code>, we can write the <code>integral</code> procedure without
having to define the auxiliary procedure <code>add-dx</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (integral f a b dx)
  (* (sum f (+ a (/ dx 2.0))
            (lambda (x) (+ x dx))
            b)
     dx))
</pre></div>

<p>In general, <code>lambda</code> is used to create procedures in the same way as
<code>define</code>, except that no name is specified for the procedure:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(lambda (⟨<var>formal-parameters</var>⟩) ⟨<var>body</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>The resulting procedure is just as much a procedure as one that is created
using <code>define</code>.  The only difference is that it has not been associated
with any name in the environment.  In fact,
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (plus4 x) (+ x 4))
</pre></div>

<p>is equivalent to
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define plus4 (lambda (x) (+ x 4)))
</pre></div>

<p>We can read a <code>lambda</code> expression as follows:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example">(lambda                     (x)     (+   x     4))
    |                        |       |   |     |
the procedure of an argument x that adds x and 4
</pre></div>

<p>Like any expression that has a procedure as its value, a <code>lambda</code>
expression can be used as the operator in a combination such as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">((lambda (x y z) (+ x y (square z))) 1 2 3)
<i>12</i>
</pre></div>

<p>or, more generally, in any context where we would normally use a procedure
name.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF53" href="#FOOT53"><sup>53</sup></a>
</p>
<a id="Using-let-to-create-local-variables"></a>
<h5 class="subsubheading">Using <code>let</code> to create local variables</h5>

<p>Another use of <code>lambda</code> is in creating local variables.  We often need
local variables in our procedures other than those that have been bound as
formal parameters.  For example, suppose we wish to compute the function

\[ % :22:
  
{f(x,y)} \,=\, {x(1 + xy)^2} + {y(1 - y)} + {(1 + xy)(1 - y),}
\]

which we could also express as

\[ % :23:
 
\begin{eqnarray}
  a                     &amp;=&amp;   {1 + xy,}  \\
  \hphantom{(x,y)} b    &amp;=&amp;   {1 - y,}   \\
  {f(x,y)}              &amp;=&amp;   {xa^2} + {yb} + {ab.}
\end{eqnarray}
\]

In writing a procedure to compute \( f \), we would like to include as local
variables not only \( x \) and \( y \) but also the names of intermediate
quantities like \( a \) and \( b \).  One way to accomplish this is to use an
auxiliary procedure to bind the local variables:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (f x y)
  (define (f-helper a b)
    (+ (* x (square a))
       (* y b)
       (* a b)))
  (f-helper (+ 1 (* x y)) 
            (- 1 y)))
</pre></div>

<p>Of course, we could use a <code>lambda</code> expression to specify an anonymous
procedure for binding our local variables.  The body of <code>f</code> then becomes a
single call to that procedure:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (f x y)
  ((lambda (a b)
     (+ (* x (square a)) 
        (* y b) 
        (* a b)))
   (+ 1 (* x y))
   (- 1 y)))
</pre></div>

<p>This construct is so useful that there is a special form called <code>let</code> to
make its use more convenient.  Using <code>let</code>, the <code>f</code> procedure could
be written as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (f x y)
  (let ((a (+ 1 (* x y)))
        (b (- 1 y)))
    (+ (* x (square a))
       (* y b)
       (* a b))))
</pre></div>

<p>The general form of a <code>let</code> expression is
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(let ((⟨<var>var₁</var>⟩ ⟨<var>exp₁</var>⟩)
      (⟨<var>var₂</var>⟩ ⟨<var>exp₂</var>⟩)
      <span class="roman">…</span>
      (⟨<var>varₙ</var>⟩ ⟨<var>expₙ</var>⟩))
  ⟨<var>body</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>which can be thought of as saying
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example">let ⟨<var>var₁</var>⟩ <span class="roman">have the value</span> ⟨<var>exp₁</var>⟩ <span class="roman">and</span>
    ⟨<var>var₂</var>⟩ <span class="roman">have the value</span> ⟨<var>exp₂</var>⟩ <span class="roman">and</span>
    <span class="roman">…</span>
    ⟨<var>varₙ</var>⟩ <span class="roman">have the value</span> ⟨<var>expₙ</var>⟩
  <span class="roman">in</span> ⟨<var>body</var>⟩
</pre></div>

<p>The first part of the <code>let</code> expression is a list of name-expression pairs.
When the <code>let</code> is evaluated, each name is associated with the value of the
corresponding expression.  The body of the <code>let</code> is evaluated with these
names bound as local variables.  The way this happens is that the <code>let</code>
expression is interpreted as an alternate syntax for
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">((lambda (⟨<var>var₁</var>⟩ <span class="roman">…</span> ⟨<var>varₙ</var>⟩)
   ⟨<var>body</var>⟩)
 ⟨<var>exp₁</var>⟩
 <span class="roman">…</span>
 ⟨<var>expₙ</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>No new mechanism is required in the interpreter in order to provide local
variables.  A <code>let</code> expression is simply syntactic sugar for the
underlying <code>lambda</code> application.
</p>
<p>We can see from this equivalence that the scope of a variable specified by a
<code>let</code> expression is the body of the <code>let</code>.  This implies that:
</p>
<ul>
<li> <code>Let</code> allows one to bind variables as locally as possible to where they
are to be used.  For example, if the value of <code>x</code> is 5, the value of the
expression

<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(+ (let ((x 3))
     (+ x (* x 10)))
   x)
</pre></div>

<p>is 38.  Here, the <code>x</code> in the body of the <code>let</code> is 3, so the value of
the <code>let</code> expression is 33.  On the other hand, the <code>x</code> that is the
second argument to the outermost <code>+</code> is still 5.
</p>
</li><li> The variables’ values are computed outside the <code>let</code>.  This matters when
the expressions that provide the values for the local variables depend upon
variables having the same names as the local variables themselves.  For
example, if the value of <code>x</code> is 2, the expression

<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(let ((x 3)
      (y (+ x 2)))
  (* x y))
</pre></div>

<p>will have the value 12 because, inside the body of the <code>let</code>, <code>x</code>
will be 3 and <code>y</code> will be 4 (which is the outer <code>x</code> plus 2).
</p>
</li></ul>

<p>Sometimes we can use internal definitions to get the same effect as with
<code>let</code>.  For example, we could have defined the procedure <code>f</code> above as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (f x y)
  (define a 
    (+ 1 (* x y)))
  (define b (- 1 y))
  (+ (* x (square a))
     (* y b)
     (* a b)))
</pre></div>

<p>We prefer, however, to use <code>let</code> in situations like this and to use
internal <code>define</code> only for internal procedures.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF54" href="#FOOT54"><sup>54</sup></a>
</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-1_002e34"></a>Exercise 1.34:</strong> Suppose we define the procedure
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (f g) (g 2))
</pre></div>

<p>Then we have
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(f square)
<i>4</i>

(f (lambda (z) (* z (+ z 1))))
<i>6</i>
</pre></div>

<p>What happens if we (perversely) ask the interpreter to evaluate the combination
<code>(f f)</code>?  Explain.
</p></blockquote>

<div class="footnote">
<hr/>

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT53"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF53"><sup>53</sup></a>
It would be clearer and less intimidating to people learning
Lisp if a name more obvious than <code>lambda</code>, such as <code>make-procedure</code>,
were used.  But the convention is firmly entrenched.  The notation is adopted
from the λ-calculus, a mathematical formalism introduced by the
mathematical logician Alonzo <a href="References.xhtml#Church-_00281941_0029">Church (1941)</a>.  Church developed the 
λ-calculus to provide a rigorous foundation for studying the 
notions of function
and function application.  The λ-calculus has become a basic tool
for mathematical investigations of the semantics of programming languages.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT54"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF54"><sup>54</sup></a>
Understanding
internal definitions well enough to be sure a program means what we intend it
to mean requires a more elaborate model of the evaluation process than we have
presented in this chapter.  The subtleties do not arise with internal
definitions of procedures, however.  We will return to this issue in 
<a href="4_002e1_002e6.xhtml#g_t4_002e1_002e6">4.1.6</a>, after we learn more about evaluation.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr/>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e3" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.3.3</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e3_002e1" accesskey="p" rel="prev">1.3.1</a>, Up: <a href="1_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e3" accesskey="u" rel="prev">1.3</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>
