<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 4.2.3</title>

<meta name="description" content="Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 4.2.3"/>
<meta name="keywords" content="Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 4.2.3"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0"/>
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any"/>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top"/>
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents"/>
<link href="4_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2" rel="prev" title="4.2"/>
<link href="4_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3" rel="next" title="4.3"/>
<link href="4_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2_002e2" rel="prev" title="4.2.2"/>

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/prettify.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/lang-lisp.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t4_002e2_002e3"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="4_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3" accesskey="n" rel="next">4.3</a>, Previous: <a href="4_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">4.2.2</a>, Up: <a href="4_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2" accesskey="u" rel="prev">4.2</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr/>

<a id="Streams-as-Lazy-Lists"></a>
<h4 class="subsection"><span class="secnum">4.2.3</span><span class="sectitle">Streams as Lazy Lists</span></h4>

<p>In <a href="3_002e5_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e1">3.5.1</a>, we showed how to implement streams as delayed lists.
We introduced special forms <code>delay</code> and <code>cons-stream</code>, which allowed
us to construct a “promise” to compute the <code>cdr</code> of a stream, without
actually fulfilling that promise until later.  We could use this general
technique of introducing special forms whenever we need more control over the
evaluation process, but this is awkward.  For one thing, a special form is not
a first-class object like a procedure, so we cannot use it together with
higher-order procedures.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF243" href="#FOOT243"><sup>243</sup></a>  Additionally, we were
forced to create streams as a new kind of data object similar but not identical
to lists, and this required us to reimplement many ordinary list operations
(<code>map</code>, <code>append</code>, and so on) for use with streams.
</p>
<p>With lazy evaluation, streams and lists can be identical, so there is no need
for special forms or for separate list and stream operations.  All we need to
do is to arrange matters so that <code>cons</code> is non-strict.  One way to
accomplish this is to extend the lazy evaluator to allow for non-strict
primitives, and to implement <code>cons</code> as one of these.  An easier way is to
recall (<a href="2_002e1_002e3.xhtml#g_t2_002e1_002e3">2.1.3</a>) that there is no fundamental need to implement
<code>cons</code> as a primitive at all.  Instead, we can represent pairs as
procedures:<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF244" href="#FOOT244"><sup>244</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (cons x y) (lambda (m) (m x y)))
(define (car z) (z (lambda (p q) p)))
(define (cdr z) (z (lambda (p q) q)))
</pre></div>

<p>In terms of these basic operations, the standard definitions of the list
operations will work with infinite lists (streams) as well as finite ones, and
the stream operations can be implemented as list operations.  Here are some
examples:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (list-ref items n)
  (if (= n 0)
      (car items)
      (list-ref (cdr items) (- n 1))))

(define (map proc items)
  (if (null? items)
      '()
      (cons (proc (car items))
            (map proc (cdr items)))))

(define (scale-list items factor)
  (map (lambda (x) (* x factor))
       items))

(define (add-lists list1 list2)
  (cond ((null? list1) list2)
        ((null? list2) list1)
        (else (cons (+ (car list1) 
                       (car list2))
                    (add-lists (cdr list1) 
                               (cdr list2))))))

(define ones (cons 1 ones))

(define integers 
  (cons 1 (add-lists ones integers)))

<i>;;; L-Eval input:</i>
(list-ref integers 17)

<i>;;; L-Eval value:</i>
<i>18</i>
</pre></div>

<p>Note that these lazy lists are even lazier than the streams of <a href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3">Chapter 3</a>:
The <code>car</code> of the list, as well as the <code>cdr</code>, is
delayed.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF245" href="#FOOT245"><sup>245</sup></a>  In fact, even accessing the <code>car</code> or
<code>cdr</code> of a lazy pair need not force the value of a list element.  The
value will be forced only when it is really needed—e.g., for use as the
argument of a primitive, or to be printed as an answer.
</p>
<p>Lazy pairs also help with the problem that arose with streams in 
<a href="3_002e5_002e4.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e4">3.5.4</a>, where we found that formulating stream models of systems with
loops may require us to sprinkle our programs with explicit <code>delay</code>
operations, beyond the ones supplied by <code>cons-stream</code>.  With lazy
evaluation, all arguments to procedures are delayed uniformly.  For instance,
we can implement procedures to integrate lists and solve differential equations
as we originally intended in <a href="3_002e5_002e4.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e4">3.5.4</a>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define (integral integrand initial-value dt)
  (define int
    (cons initial-value
          (add-lists (scale-list integrand dt) 
                     int)))
  int)

(define (solve f y0 dt)
  (define y (integral dy y0 dt))
  (define dy (map f y))
  y)

<i>;;; L-Eval input:</i>
(list-ref (solve (lambda (x) x) 1 0.001) 1000)

<i>;;; L-Eval value:</i>
<i>2.716924</i>
</pre></div>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-4_002e32"></a>Exercise 4.32:</strong> Give some examples that
illustrate the difference between the streams of <a href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3">Chapter 3</a> and the
“lazier” lazy lists described in this section.  How can you take advantage of
this extra laziness?
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-4_002e33"></a>Exercise 4.33:</strong> Ben Bitdiddle tests the lazy list
implementation given above by evaluating the expression
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(car '(a b c))
</pre></div>

<p>To his surprise, this produces an error.  After some thought, he realizes that
the “lists” obtained by reading in quoted expressions are different from the
lists manipulated by the new definitions of <code>cons</code>, <code>car</code>, and
<code>cdr</code>.  Modify the evaluator’s treatment of quoted expressions so that
quoted lists typed at the driver loop will produce true lazy lists.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-4_002e34"></a>Exercise 4.34:</strong> Modify the driver loop for the
evaluator so that lazy pairs and lists will print in some reasonable way.
(What are you going to do about infinite lists?)  You may also need to modify
the representation of lazy pairs so that the evaluator can identify them in
order to print them.
</p></blockquote>

<div class="footnote">
<hr/>

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT243"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF243"><sup>243</sup></a>
This is precisely the issue with the
<code>unless</code> procedure, as in <a href="4_002e2_002e1.xhtml#Exercise-4_002e26">Exercise 4.26</a>.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT244"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF244"><sup>244</sup></a>
This is the procedural representation described in
<a href="2_002e1_002e3.xhtml#Exercise-2_002e4">Exercise 2.4</a>.  Essentially any procedural representation (e.g., a
message-passing implementation) would do as well.  Notice that we can install
these definitions in the lazy evaluator simply by typing them at the driver
loop.  If we had originally included <code>cons</code>, <code>car</code>, and <code>cdr</code> as
primitives in the global environment, they will be redefined.  (Also see
<a href="#Exercise-4_002e33">Exercise 4.33</a> and <a href="#Exercise-4_002e34">Exercise 4.34</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT245"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF245"><sup>245</sup></a>
This permits us to create delayed versions of more general
kinds of list structures, not just sequences.  <a href="References.xhtml#Hughes-1990">Hughes 1990</a> discusses some
applications of “lazy trees.”</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr/>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="4_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3" accesskey="n" rel="next">4.3</a>, Previous: <a href="4_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">4.2.2</a>, Up: <a href="4_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e2" accesskey="u" rel="prev">4.2</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>
