<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 5.2</title>

<meta name="description" content="Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 5.2"/>
<meta name="keywords" content="Cau truc va Y nghia cua Chuong Trinh May tinh, 2e: 5.2"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0"/>
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any"/>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top"/>
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index"/>
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents"/>
<link href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" rel="prev" title="Chapter 5"/>
<link href="5_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e1" rel="next" title="5.2.1"/>
<link href="5_002e1_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e1_002e5" rel="prev" title="5.1.5"/>

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/prettify.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script class="prettifier" src="js/highlight/lang-lisp.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t5_002e2"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.2.1</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e1_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e1_002e5" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.1.5</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 5</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr/>

<a id="A-Register_002dMachine-Simulator"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">5.2</span><span class="sectitle">A Register-Machine Simulator</span></h3>

<p>In order to gain a good understanding of the design of register machines, we
must test the machines we design to see if they perform as expected.  One way
to test a design is to hand-simulate the operation of the controller, as in
<a href="5_002e1_002e4.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e5">Exercise 5.5</a>.  But this is extremely tedious for all but the simplest
machines.  In this section we construct a simulator for machines described in
the register-machine language.  The simulator is a Scheme program with four
interface procedures.  The first uses a description of a register machine to
construct a model of the machine (a data structure whose parts correspond to
the parts of the machine to be simulated), and the other three allow us to
simulate the machine by manipulating the model:
</p>
<blockquote>

<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(make-machine ⟨<var>register-names</var>⟩
              ⟨<var>operations</var>⟩
              ⟨<var>controller</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>constructs and returns a model of the machine with the given registers,
operations, and controller.
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(set-register-contents! ⟨<var>machine-model</var>⟩ 
                        ⟨<var>register-name</var>⟩ 
                        ⟨<var>value</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>stores a value in a simulated register in the given machine.
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(get-register-contents ⟨<var>machine-model</var>⟩
                       ⟨<var>register-name</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>returns the contents of a simulated register in the given machine.
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(start ⟨<var>machine-model</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>simulates the execution of the given machine, starting from the beginning of
the controller sequence and stopping when it reaches the end of the sequence.
</p></blockquote>

<p>As an example of how these procedures are used, we can define
<code>gcd-machine</code> to be a model of the <abbr>GCD</abbr> machine of 
<a href="5_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e1_002e1">5.1.1</a> as follows:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(define gcd-machine
  (make-machine
   '(a b t)
   (list (list 'rem remainder) (list '= =))
   '(test-b
       (test (op =) (reg b) (const 0))
       (branch (label gcd-done))
       (assign t (op rem) (reg a) (reg b))
       (assign a (reg b))
       (assign b (reg t))
       (goto (label test-b))
     gcd-done)))
</pre></div>

<p>The first argument to <code>make-machine</code> is a list of register names.  The
next argument is a table (a list of two-element lists) that pairs each
operation name with a Scheme procedure that implements the operation (that is,
produces the same output value given the same input values).  The last argument
specifies the controller as a list of labels and machine instructions, as in
<a href="5_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e1">5.1</a>.
</p>
<p>To compute <abbr>GCD</abbr>s with this machine, we set the input registers, start
the machine, and examine the result when the simulation terminates:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp">(set-register-contents! gcd-machine 'a 206)
<i>done</i>

(set-register-contents! gcd-machine 'b 40)
<i>done</i>

(start gcd-machine)
<i>done</i>

(get-register-contents gcd-machine 'a)
<i>2</i>
</pre></div>

<p>This computation will run much more slowly than a <code>gcd</code> procedure written
in Scheme, because we will simulate low-level machine instructions, such as
<code>assign</code>, by much more complex operations.
</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e7"></a>Exercise 5.7:</strong> Use the simulator to test the
machines you designed in <a href="5_002e1_002e4.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e4">Exercise 5.4</a>.
</p></blockquote>

<table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e1" accesskey="1">5.2.1</a>:</td><td>&#160;&#160;</td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">The Machine Model
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e2" accesskey="2">5.2.2</a>:</td><td>&#160;&#160;</td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">The Assembler
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e2_002e3.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e3" accesskey="3">5.2.3</a>:</td><td>&#160;&#160;</td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Generating Execution Procedures for Instructions
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e2_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e4" accesskey="4">5.2.4</a>:</td><td>&#160;&#160;</td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Monitoring Machine Performance
</td></tr>
</table>

<hr/>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.2.1</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e1_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e1_002e5" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.1.5</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 5</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>
